I Y n 1c ,. DC:IUIC I uciau WUl ll.lll tj, Wllll .ru y1111\ • ing. I made everyrhing by hand -I didn't even use a sewing machine. So, from the outset, I adjusted my process to the 3-0 printer. Working with 3-0 print· ing forces you to make decisions at a very early stage in your process. Normally, when l make a piece by hand, the process of making is actually the design process. As you stitch, you change things and make them better. But. with 3-D printing, you have to decide the final look before it's made. The piece comes out of the machine completely finished. It's like giving birth. It was scary in the beginning, but I like it when something is not comfortable. AO Can you describe your process with regard to 3-0 printing? JVH I start with sketches, which I draw by hand, to figure out the silhouette and proport ions. The actual process of modeling and designing is all done on the computer. I work with an architect. It's a strange process. Weskype for hours and hours. Jr's a collaboration. The result is like a two-way drawing. For me, th e most difficult part is deciding -down to the very last millimeter -how you want th e piece to look without seeing it in three dimensions because the computer screen is rwo-dimensional. AB You seem to relish collaboration. As well as architects, you've worked with arcists, scientists, engineers, and computer designers. I think this type of collaboration, and the sharing of exper· tise among specialists in diverse disciplines, is the future of fashion. They'll advance fashion in ways previously unimaginable. IVH My collaboration s are exte nsions of my ate· lier. For example, I've worked with the architect Philip Beesley, who has an atelier in Toronto. It's a dreamlike place with every type of machine you can imagine. When I discover a new process in my atelier, I share it with him, and he explores it in his atelier. He does the same with me. Our ateliers arc separated by geography, but it's like working in one ateli er. AB Your collaborations with architects are akin to the collaborations with the artisans of the coucure, such as Lesage, LemariC, and Lognon. They're like a twenty-first century version. 1v H I also work those ateliers. For me, it's less excit· ing because there's an equality of knowledge. They rarely come up with something th at triggers my imagination. Scientiscs and architect s challenge me. They make me look at my work differently. They take me out of my comfort zone. AB As an artist, it's important to be challenged. 1v1-1 It's part of my process. I need to step outside of my routin e. It gives me a different perspective. AB How did you feel when you became a guest member of the Chambre Syn<licale de la Haute Couture? I VH I was total Iv surorised. Mv work falls outside I 111uu51 1L I\ WCI.I ¥Cly u pc::1 1·1 11111ucuu1 UIC '-'llcl U IUI C Syndicale. · AB Yes, that is very reassurin g. IVH Like many designers, I tho ught you had to make everything by hand in Paris to meet the reg· ulations of the Chambre Syndicate. It made me realize that the haut e cou tur e is about craftsman· ship, regardless of the types of crafts you employ. Of course it's also about the time that goes into a piece and the amount you produce. If you make rwo hundr ed dresses, it is not couture. AB Do you approach your haute couture and prCt· A-porter collections differently? IVH Th ere is a whole system behind ready-to· wear, especially.in terms of production. Everything is thought out differently. You can't work for two months -by hand-on ready-to-wear, but you can with coutur e. AB And th<dit? IVH The fie is the biggest problem I have with ready·to·wear. I began with couture, and I love to make a piece that fits the body perfectly. AB Do you think chat the categor ies of the haucc couture and prct-3-porter arc still relevant? IVH They shouldn't be relevant. But the gap between the haute couture and ready·to·wear is too big nowadays. The space in between is what I find interesting. That's where I want to be involved. AB I love 1'in between" space. To me, it's where ere· ativity has freedom and autonomy. Do you th ink techno logy has a role to play in this in-between, interstitia l space? Iv 1-1 I definitely think technology could fill the gap between the hautc couture and ready-to-wear. In general, people in fashion arc very interested in tech· nology. But most companies see it as a marketing strategy. There is not one company in fashion that really embeds new technology, such as 3-0 printing. as partofitscreat ivc endeavor. The useof3-0 print· ing is more advanced in design and architecture. AB Is th at because the matc rial lends itself better to design and arch itectur e? IVH Yes, but in fashion th ere arc some flexible materia ls within 3-0 printing. However, most of them don't look very nice and the quality is not very good. It could be a lot further along if com· panics were more willing to invest real money. It is most advanced in the medical world because it' s th e biggest market and it has the biggest investment. In fashion, 3-0 printing has to start findin g its way into the creative minds of designers as well as into the business minds of company executives. AB In fashion, I also think that 3·0 printing has to become more user-friendlv. 1 vH I nas mcreo 101e poss10111t1ca~rcc. 1c s out 1t needs to evolve furth er to make it more humanfriendly. FOr instance, it take$ a lot of time to create a file for a complex dress, although for a simple dress the process can be pretty quick and you can print it on demand. That's why the 3·D·printing process was origina lly called rapid prototyping. Once you have the file, it's easy to adjust details. It's much sim· pler than traditional pattern making. And it's more environmentally friendly th an the sewing machine. AB Howso ? IVH With 3·0 printing, you don't start with a flat piece of material. Instead, you build the material dir ectly from powder, so you create your shape without any waste. In fashion today there is so much waste in materia ls. AB And 3-D printing also creates a lot of possibilities for custom ization. I VH Exactly. Today, there is a big market for CUS· tomization. A 3-D-printed dress can be made to measure for you on demand, and it can beach ieved much less expensively than couture. AB Yes, the 3-0 printer could be as revolutionary as th e sewing machine , and the jacquard machine beforehand. IV H Custo mizat ion is going to become increas· ingly more important. New technologies will help to evolve niches of mass custo mization on a quicker timeframe. Today, people want more individuality. They also want more control, and they want products -clot hes especially-faster and faster. Technology can help reach that direct level of connection with your customer. AB Apart from 3·0 printing, are there any other techno logies that might have an impact on mass customization? IV H The techno logy of3 -D knilting is very inter· esting. But it's scill mechanical, which makes it less flexible for customization. AB Arc there any technologies that might have an impact on the future of fashion in general, such as 4-0 printing? I Vii I'm very interested in 4·0 printing -the idea of engineering a mater ial. So not simply bu ilding it but, over time, giving it a behavio r. A material, for instanc e, that is soft and warm in the winter and thin and airy in th e summer. AB What about robotic printing? IVH I think robotic print ing will become more rel· evant over time. 3-0 printing is an over-contro lled environm ent, so part of the process of experimen· cation is lost. Robotic printing falls in between the impulsiveness of handwork and the deliberateness of 3-D printing . For example, elements such as graviry and velocity can become part of your pro· f't".'l'l. In tt"rm, n( r r, .nivirv ir', mnr, n ... vihl .. an.-1 AH Nanoroooucs and nanomat cnals seem as at 
they could have a significant influence on fashion. 
JVH There is a whole area of research into cngi· 
necringon a microscopic level in all directions. But 
many of th e technologi es, like nanorobotics , are 
. 	not yet embedded in fashion. I've been working on a project using very small drones, like nanodrones, to make a dress-in a lightweight material-that is not one entity. A dress is often seen from a purely aesthet ic perspective, so I'm always trying to gen· crate more freedom within my creative space of what makes a dress interesting. I'm not quite there yet because the technology isn't advanced enough. The contro l of these little drones will take a year or two to develop into a system that will produce a dress I can cont rol com pletely in its movement. I've also been working on a nanomateria l, which involves engineering on a very small scale. AB Nanoengineering seems especially apposite in 
fabric development. 
IV H Yes. One company has made a fabric rhat 
bends th e light, so you can see thr ough it. At chc 
moment, it's used only by the U.S. Army. There is 
also a company in the U.K. that has made a mat e· 
rial, also used by the U.S. Army, that is so intensely 
black it absorbs all light. There is no black that even 
comes close to that amount ofblackness. It's like a 
black hole. Any three-dimensional object coated in 
the material would become completely Oar because 
there would be no depth. 
AB What about metamat erials? IV Ii They go one step furt her. Like nanomaterials, 
they behave in a completely different way than any 
material we know today. But we're not there yet 
they 're maybe ten or twenty years into the future . 
AB With nanoengincer ing and metamaterials, 
can you foresee a future within fashion whereby 
clothes as we know them will not only look dif
ferent but will also function differently ? That is, a 
future in which both the pragmatics and compo· 
nentsof dressing arc brought into question? 
IVH I think nanoengineering and mctamaterials 
will probably create completely new behaviors. 
As designers, we don't realize how much of our 
designs are dictated by materials and their behav· 
ior. Instinctively, a designer knows how a seam will 
work, th at there will be gravity, that there will be 
a certain amount of transparency. So, imagine a 
material that makes you completely invisible. As a 
designer, it's almost unthinkab le how mctamat cri· 
als will change the design process. In fashion, those 
changes are going to be even more radical than the 
techniq ues of making cloth ing. 
AB What is your position on biotechnology -the 
fusion of biology and technology? 
IVH It's starting to get very serious, and it's some· 
thing l'm very inter ested in exploring. If you look 
at biology, it's a hundred times more complex than 
t•rh nnlnnu ~n, .,h .... .,. h: .... 1,..,.,..,. ... ~.,.,.,.i.,..,.1,.,.,, ,.,._,. 